Update EIP-5792: Propose changes to EIP-5792 atomicity (#9529)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5792.md

Each entity in the `calls` field may contain an optional `capabilities` object.
This object allows the applications to attach a capability-specific metadata to individual calls.

> The `atomicity` field specifies how the wallet should handle the batch of calls. Despite not being a capability, and being a top-level field in the request, the wallet supported values can be sourced via `wallet_getCapabilities`.

Reviewer: > Despite not being a capability

This is inconsistent with the later section titled "`atomicity` Capability". Should this just say something like the following instead?

```suggestion
The `atomicity` field specifies how the wallet should handle the batch of calls. It is a built in capability and the wallet supported values can be sourced via `wallet_getCapabilities`.
```

* MUST send the calls from the address specified in the request's `from` property, if provided
  * If `from` is not provided the wallet SHOULD present the user with an opportunity to view and select the `from` address during confirmation
* MUST NOT await for any calls to be finalized to complete the batch
* MUST NOT send any calls from the request if the user rejects the request
* When atomic is set to `true`:
  * MUST execute all calls atomically—either all calls execute successfully or no material effects appear on chain.
  * MUST execute all calls contiguously, meaning no other transactions/calls may be interleaved with the calls from this batch.
* When atomic is set to `false`:
  * SHOULD execute all calls sequentially without any atomicity/contiguity guarantees.

>   * MAY upgrade to `atomic: true`.

Reviewer 2: How does the upgrade from atomic `true` to `false` work?

Reviewer 3: nit: wording is a little confusing here & makes it sound like the default should be to downgrade if a wallet is capable of atomicity. would flip it around & be a little more explicit:
```
...
* When atomic is set to `false`:
  * MAY execute all calls sequentially without any atomicity/contiguity guarantees.
  * If a wallet that is capable of providing atomicity guarantees receives a batch with `atomic: false`, it MAY execute the batch atomically.
```

* MUST send the calls from the address specified in the request's `from` property, if provided
  * If `from` is not provided the wallet SHOULD present the user with an opportunity to view and select the `from` address during confirmation
* MUST NOT await for any calls to be finalized to complete the batch
* MUST NOT send any calls from the request if the user rejects the request
* When atomicity is set to `strict`:

>   * MUST execute all calls atomically in a single transaction.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * MUST execute all calls atomically—either all calls execute successfully or no material effects appear on chain.
  * MUST execute all calls contiguously, meaning no other transactions/calls may be interleaved with the calls from this batch.
```

I would _really_ like to avoid the "single transaction" language. There's no reason to require a single transaction. You can get atomicity over multiple transactions. The trivial example would be a multi sig where each signature is submitted in a transaction and the final signature triggers execution.

Author: I might be missing something, but I do not see how a multi sig would trigger an atomic execution through multiple transactions. Nevertheless I agree with you. We should not restrict the spec to `strict = single transaction`. We should leave it broad enough so that the space can evolve unconstrained.
An example is the `sendBundle` announced by Linea team. That is a new rpc method that they are implementing and will achieve `strict` atomicity through multiple transactions (as Linea has single slot finality there are no reorgs). So a batch is only included if all transactions of the batch are executed properly (can be included in the block and don't revert).

* When atomicity is set to `loose`:
  * MAY execute each call as a single transaction, as part of a bundle that is executed atomically.
  * MAY execute all calls atomically in a single transaction.
* When atomicity is set to `none`:
  * MAY execute each call as a single transaction.
  * MAY execute each call as a single transaction, as part of a bundle that is executed atomically.

>   * MAY execute all calls sequentially without any atomicity guarantees.

Reviewer 4: This doesn't specify the behaviour on failed transactions.

Author: Do you think that we need to specify the behaviour for failed transactions submitted sequentially?

I was thinking that we could leave that for the wallets to decide. Meaning that in the simplest form, an app that does not care about atomic execution, will need to go through the receipts and figure out the batch was executed. I would leave further specifications to a different capability (like the [flow-control](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7867.md) one).

  id?: string;
  from?: `0x${string}`;
  chainId: `0x${string}`; // Hex chain id

>   atomicity: "atomic" | "nonAtomic" | "any";

Reviewer 5: Seems like it would be nice to have atomicPreferred for when it's preferred but not required

Author: Would it ever not be preferred? 🤔 Both from Wallet and App perspective..

The idea for `any`, is for when an App does not care about execution, but really just wants to send a batch of transactions to the wallet.

Also I have not added the option for the Wallet to support both non-atomic and atomic execution for the same chain ([see here](https://github.com/cryptotavares/EIPs/blob/cryptotavares/atomicity-proposal/EIPS/eip-5792.md#atomicity-capability)). The reason was exactly that if `atomic` is available then the calls will be executed atomically.
Do you think that there's a case where:
* A wallet would prefer sequential execution on a chain where it supports atomic execution?
* An App would prefer sequential execution when it can ask for atomic execution?

And if yes, do you feel that it should be included in the spec, or that it is specific enough that it could be its own capability (defined as a different erc)?

>   atomicity: "atomic" | "non-atomic" | "any";

Reviewer 3: nits:
- wondering if should be `strict`, `loose`, `any`. seems a little more descriptive? @SamWilsn curious if you have strong opinions on naming here
- also wondering if it should be camel case, given these are largely used in js and camel case is more idiomatic

Author: So I initially considered those options (in order to better integrate with the [flow-control capability](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/c941b5c4519dcf24f39a1bc9163ed28cc5ac5a11/EIPS/eip-7867.md)). However, I thought that `atomic` should cover both `strict` and `loose` (for 99% percent of users those are implementation details... which can be fined tuned via the flow-control capability).

I agree that we can probably drop the `non-atomic` option. I initially included it because, although I am not sure why an App would want to explicitly execute calls sequentially, I also did not want close that door.

Author: Also agree on the camel case.. updated 👍

Author: On having only the `atomic` value vs having `strict` and `loose`, I think that there'a tradeoff there. For once, having more explicit values would simplify the `wallet_getCallsStatus`, as we can specify the expected `receipts` for each option. At the same time, It feels that we are drilling to much into implementation details that are better extracted to its own capability.

Let me know your thoughts @lukasrosario and @SamWilsn.

Author: Updated the proposal to include loose atomicity. The `strict`, `loose` and `none` atomicity concepts are directly taken from the [flow-control capability](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-7867.md) proposed by @SamWilsn

The `capabilities` object allows the wallets to attach a capability-specific metadata to the response.

The `atomicity` field specifies how the wallet handled the batch of calls, which influences the structure of the `receipts` field.

* The receipts in the `receipts` field MUST be in the order that they are included onchain.
* If a wallet executes multiple calls **atomically** in a single transaction, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that contains a single transaction receipt, corresponding to the transaction in which the calls were included. it also MUST be explicit and return a `atomicity` field set to `"atomic"`.

> * If a wallet executes multiple calls **non-atomically**, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that contains **an array of receipts** for all transactions containing batch calls that were included onchain. This includes the batch calls that were included on-chain but eventually reverted. It also MUST be explicit and return a `atomicity` field set to `"nonAtomic"`.

Reviewer 6: This is in reference to "loose" atomicity where a wallet could use `eth_sendBundle` for example and multiple transactions could be submitted "atomically", at least in 99.9% of cases.

The `capabilities` object allows the wallets to attach a capability-specific metadata to the response.

The `atomicity` field specifies how the wallet handled the batch of calls, which influences the structure of the `receipts` field.

* The receipts in the `receipts` field MUST be in the order that they are included onchain.
* If a wallet executes multiple calls **atomically** in a single transaction, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that contains a single transaction receipt, corresponding to the transaction in which the calls were included. It also MUST be explicit and return an `atomicity` field set to `"strict"`.
* If a wallet executes multiple calls **atomically** in a multiple transactions as part of a bundle, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that contains **an array of receipts** for all transactions. It also MUST be explicit and return a `atomicity` field set to `"loose"`.

> * If a wallet executes multiple calls **non-atomically**, `wallet_getCallsStatus` MUST return an object with a `receipts` field that contains **an array of receipts** for all transactions containing batch calls that were included onchain. This includes the batch calls that were included on-chain but eventually reverted. It also MUST be explicit and return a `atomicity` field set to `"none"`.

Author: The benefit was to try to make the reasoning about the receipts structure simple and comprehensive enough for dapps. Reduce the complexity and any ambiguity that might exist. However I feel that we can make it less restrictive, as I agree with your previous comment about `strict` being executed as multiple transactions. At that point, then the receipts field can have:
* a single or multiple transactions for `strict` atomicity
* multiple transactions for `loose` and `none`

  "chainId": "0x01",
  "id": "0x00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000e670ec64341771606e55d6b4ca35a1a6b75ee3d5145a99d05921026d1527331",
  "status": 200,

>   "atomicity": "strict";

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  "atomicity": "strict",
```

}
```

### `atomicity` Capability

Like the illustrative examples given above and other capabilities to be defined in future EIPs, the capability to specify how calls delivered via the above-defined methods should be executed can be expressed  as `atomic` or `non-atomic`.

> This capability is expressed separately on each chain and should be interpreted as a guarantee only for batches of transactions on that chain

Reviewer 3: is this supposed to be how the wallet expresses the values for `atomicity` it supports? if so think we could reword to make a bit clearer, lmk if you had something else in mind though

Author: Yes that was the idea...
I have kept the details on the how the flow is controlled, because I believe that those are implementation details that can be better expressed via the flow-control capability. I have prioritised simplicity over configuration. Meaning that the Wallet can implement the both the `atomic` and `non-atomic` option as it sees fit. As long as it respects the atomicity for the calls execution.

Re-worded it a bit. Let me know what you think.

}
```

### `atomicity` Capability

Like the illustrative examples given above and other capabilities to be defined in future EIPs, the `atomicity` capability specifies how the wallet will execute the batches of transactions requested through `wallet_sendCalls` method.

The only valid JSON-RPC values for this capability's only member, `atomicity`, are `"atomic"` and `"nonAtomic"`:

* `atomic` means that the wallet will execute the calls as part of a single transaction.
* `nonAtomic` means that the wallet will execute the each call as an individual transaction.

> This capability is expressed separately on each chain and should be interpreted as a guarantee only for batches of transactions on that chain.

Author: Do you think that there's a case where a Wallet would prefer to submit a batch sequentially when atomic is available?
See my comment here - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9529#discussion_r2012813371

> This capability is expressed separately on each chain and should be interpreted as a guarantee only for batches of transactions on that chain.

Reviewer 7: Agree with @cryptotavares - and if the use case is (for example) related to the size / number of calls being too large for one transaction I don't think it's worth introducing that edge case (i.e. the call should fail & the app should batch calls on its side)

}
```

### `atomic` Capability

Like the illustrative examples given above and other capabilities to be defined in future EIPs, the `atomic` capability specifies how the wallet will execute the batches of transactions requested through `wallet_sendCalls` method.

The only valid JSON-RPC values for this capability's only member, `atomic`, are `true` or `false`:

* `true` means that the wallet will execute the calls atomically and contiguously. 
* `false` means that the wallet does not provide any atomicity or contiguity guarantees.

This capability is expressed separately on each chain and should be interpreted as a guarantee only for batches of transactions on that chain.

> If the `atomic` capability is not present for a given chain, and unless it is explicitly overriden by anothe `capability` (not in scope of this EIP), it means that the wallet does not support batching for that given chain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `atomic` capability is not present for a given chain, and unless it is explicitly overriden by another `capability` (not in scope of this EIP), it means that the wallet does not support batching for that given chain.
```

}
```

### `atomic` Capability

Like the illustrative examples given above and other capabilities to be defined in future EIPs, the `atomic` capability specifies how the wallet will execute the batches of transactions requested through `wallet_sendCalls` method.

The only valid JSON-RPC values for this capability's only member, `atomic`, are `true` or `false`:

* `true` means that the wallet will execute the calls atomically and contiguously. 
* `false` means that the wallet does not provide any atomicity or contiguity guarantees.

This capability is expressed separately on each chain and should be interpreted as a guarantee only for batches of transactions on that chain.

If the `atomic` capability is not present for a given chain, and unless it is explicitly overriden by another `capability` (not in scope of this EIP), it means that the wallet does not support batching for that given chain.

#### `atomic` Capability Specification

```typescript
type AtomicCapability = boolean;
```

#### `wallet_getCapabilities` Example Return Value including `atomicBatch`

```json
{
  "0x2105": {

>     "atomic": true

Reviewer 8: sorry if i missed something, but why are these
`"atomic": true`
instead of 
`"atomic": { "supported": true }`
like the other examples above?

Author: The other capabilities highlighted in the spec are just examples of what we might have, but they are not real capabilities defined anywhere. Also there is no specified type for the capability itself (currently is specified as `any`). Only for the [`getCapabilities` response](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-5792.md#wallet_getcapabilities-rpc-specification):
```js
type GetCapabilitiesResult = Record<`0x${string}`, <Record<string, any>>; // Hex chain id
```
I opted for a simple boolean just for simplicity.

Do you think we should change the capability type from `any` to be something more structured?
My personal opinion is that we should keep it unconstrained, because adopting a capability will be an intended action. So app and wallet will need to specifically develop and implement such capability. And if that is the case, then we should, at least for now, not constrain capability authors with a specified schema/structure.

What do you think?

Reviewer 3: i think we should keep the `GetCapabilitiesResult` type as is but agree we should conform to `"atomic": { "supported": true }`. i dont think that format needs to be a strict requirement, but i dont see why we'd stray from it

### Call Execution Atomicity

> The `wallet_sendCalls` method accepts an array of `calls`. However, this proposal does not require that these calls be executed as part of a single transaction. It enables EOA wallets to express their ability to execute calls as part of a single transaction (atomically) or as part of multiple transactions (non-atomically). It also enables Apps to express their preference for how calls must be executed (in case a wallet supports both atomic and non-atomic execution).

Reviewer 7: How can there be revert protection across multiple transactions? Seems like that is hard to generalise?

> The `wallet_sendCalls` method accepts an array of `calls`. However, this proposal does not require that these calls be executed as part of a single transaction. It enables EOA wallets to express their ability to execute calls as part of a single transaction (atomically) or as part of multiple transactions (non-atomically). It also enables Apps to express their preference for how calls must be executed (in case a wallet supports both atomic and non-atomic execution).

Author: see my comment https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9529#discussion_r2022512583

> The `atomicity` special capability that was made an integral part of this specification in order promote expressiveness. And due to its importance to reduce ambiguity between the App and the Wallet, the capability is expressed as a top-level field in the `wallet_sendCalls` request and the `wallet_getCallsStatus` response.

Reviewer 7: I think as well as expressiveness, this is to facilitate adoption by EOAs (for example where 7702 isn't available or a user hasn't enabled it for their account)

### Call Execution Atomicity

The `wallet_sendCalls` method accepts an array of `calls`. However, this proposal does not require that these calls be executed as part of a single transaction. It enables EOA wallets to express their ability to execute calls as part of a single transaction (strict atomicity) or as part of multiple transactions (loose atomicity or none atomicity). It also enables Apps to express their minimum atomicity requirements for how calls must be executed.

The `atomicity` special capability that was made an integral part of this specification in order promote expressiveness and facilitate adoption (from both wallets and apps). And due to its importance to reduce ambiguity between the App and the Wallet, the capability is expressed as a top-level field in the `wallet_sendCalls` request and the `wallet_getCallsStatus` response.

> We initially proposed that multiple calls must be executed atomically, but after some debate we ultimately decided this was too opinionated. Instead, we are including a specification for an `atomicity` capability. This allows for EOA wallets to accept multiple calls and still gives developers the option to only submit batched calls if they are executed atomically.

Author: Agree. Seem my comment here - https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9529/files#r2022512583

## Security Considerations

> Regardless of the `atomic` value specified, App developers MUST NOT assume that all calls will be sent in a single transaction.

Reviewer 9: The definition above states:
> * MUST execute all calls atomically—either all calls execute successfully or no material effects appear on chain.
Can you give an example of an implementation of "atomic:true" that matches that assert, and still is not on a single transaction ?

> Regardless of the `atomic` value specified, App developers MUST NOT assume that all calls will be sent in a single transaction.

Author: @drortirosh see my comment [here](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/9529#discussion_r2022512583)

## Security Considerations

> App developers MUST NOT assume that all calls will be sent in a single transaction if they were submitted to a wallet with a `atomicity` set to `nonAtomic` or another capability defining how to execute the calls non-atomically.

Author: From a previous version of the proposal 😅
Removing it.
